## Randomization test in the golden jackals case

### Shiny app

author: Humberto Reyes
date: February 19, 2015

#### Numerical methods

The advent and generalization of computer usage has radically changed the way we do statistical analysis. In particular, the following methods have proven to be highly useful:

- Randomization
- Bootstrap
- Monte Carlo

#### Randomization

Randomization methods can be used to test hypotheses, particulary in the cases where distributions are unknown or unsuitable for standard statistical methods.

#### Comparison of means


Let's say we have two data samples, and we want to check if there is a pattern of difference between means. The randomization test is performed as follows:

1. Find the sample means and the difference $D_1$ between them.
2. Randomly reallocate the values among both samples and find the difference $D_2$
3. Repeat the step 2 many times, to estimate the randomization distribution
4. Check if $D_1$ is a typical value of the randomization distribution. If it is unusually small or large, then it is unlikely to have arisen if the null model is true.

#### The golden jackals case

Brayan F. J. Manly, in his book "Randomization, Bootstrap and Monte Carlo Methods in Bilogy", illustrates the randomization test with the problem of the golden jackals

#### The golden jackals case


The data were generated by Higham et al. (1980). They are mandible lengths in milimiters, for male and female golden jackals, 10 of each sex, in the collection of the Brithish Museum of Natural History in London.

The question is wether or not the male jackals have bigger mandibles than females. Rather than performing a *t*-test,which assumes normallity, we can perfom a randomization test, relaxing such assumption.

#### The data



```
   females males
1      110   120
2      111   107
3      107   110
4      108   116
5      110   114
6      105   111
7      107   113
8      106   117
9      111   114
10     111   112
```

#### My shiny app

  
  The goal of this [shiny app](http://mathgenome.shinyapps.io/project/) is to show the randomization test in the golden jackals case. It contains the following elements:
  - An introduction
  - A slider to change the number of randomizations
  - A golden jackal photo (from Wikipipedia and licence that allows sharing)
  - A panel with the original data
  - A panel with the histogram of the randomization distribution
  - A table with results of the randomization test
  
#### Comments


- In this example we can see that the *H0* is rejected
- The randomized distribution gets highly symmetrical after 1000 randomizations.
- After 1000 randomizations the results barely change


  
